Text on page 1:
Animal and plant proteins:  
What is happening around the world? 
Insights from FrieslandCampina Institute Independent External  
Expert Panel roundtable discussion


Text on page 2:
Sustainable healthy diets don’t necessarily need to be 
exclusively plant-based. Both animal and plant-based 
foods belong in a sustainable healthy diet. They provide 
different nutrients. For example, plant-based foods are 
good sources of fiber and vitamin C. Meanwhile, animal-
based foods are good sources of iron, B vitamins, 
calcium and higher quality protein.  
 
 
In July 2023, FrieslandCampina Institute organized  
a roundtable discussion with 6 international experts  
in the fields of nutrition, medicine, public health, and 
consumer behaviour. The goal was to better understand 
the multifaceted aspects of protein food choices in  
 
the context of sustainable healthy diets across the globe.  
The experts believe that potential solutions need to  
be region focused. Their viewpoints are summarized  
in this report.
How to make sustainable 
healthy food choices?
Our food choices affect both our physical and planetary health. Protein is a key 
nutrient that often comes up in discussions on sustainable diets. Both the World 
Health Organization (WHO) and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
emphasize the importance of protein food sources that promote human health, 
align with global goals and respect finite planetary resources1. 
The experts are members of the FrieslandCampina Institute Independent External Expert Panel:
Professor Adam Drewnowski  
(United States)
Professor Wim Verbeke  
(Belgium)
Professor Ma Guansheng  
(China)
Professor Folake Samuel 
(Nigeria)
Professor Aryono Hendarto  
(Indonesia)
To read more 
 about the experts
click here
Associate Professor  
Mary Foong-Fong Chong  
(Singapore)
• Is there a dual shift in global protein 
food choices happening concurrently, 
or are there more nuances to consider?   
 
• Do we consider all animal proteins as 
equal in the sustainability debate, or 
does dairy and other lower carbon 
footprint animal proteins merit  
a separate discussion?  
 
• Global protein food choices are not 
just about eating less meat, but also 
about fair distribution of protein 
around the world. There are regions 
with overconsumption of animal 
protein and regions with very low 
access to animal protein.  
• Plant-based alternatives are popular 
mainly because they are considered 
more environmentally friendly than 
dairy products. However, it is 
important to note that plant-based 
alternatives are not nutritionally 
equivalent to dairy products.   
 
• An optimal global protein food choice 
requires incorporating a balance of 
both animal and plant protein, and 
that balance needs to consider many 
factors such as cultural acceptance, 
nutrition and health challenges, 
agricultural landscape, and 
economics. How does this optimal 
choice look like? Time will tell.  
• Ultra-processed plant-based products 
are often wrongly considered as part 
of a plant-based diet. This is not  
what official and scientific 
recommendations, and guidelines 
refer to when talking about a plant-
based diet. More awareness and 
education are needed to promote 
whole, plant-based foods such as 
vegetables, nuts, fruits, and legumes 
instead.  
 
 
 
Experts' viewpoint on protein transition:  
key takeaways 


Text on page 3:
Are there global shifts in 
protein food choices? 
Despite lengthy discussions, there is still no singular global solution for a 
sustainable diet that benefits both planetary and human health. Generally, 
two major and opposing trends are identified.
High income countries are 
promoting plant-forward diets 
Some of these countries have reached peak meat 
consumption and are adopting policies aimed at 
promoting diets with a higher proportion of plant-based 
proteins. These policy measures intend to address the 
overconsumption of animal proteins, mitigate the effects 
of livestock production on the environment and provide 
for more balanced diets. Alternative proteins can come 
from natural sources such as beans and legumes, though 
advanced technologies are also being used to formulate 
plant-based alternatives to milk, eggs and meat.
Low- and middle-income countries 
are consuming more meat and dairy 
Other countries are trending in the opposite direction. 
As household and country incomes grow, diets built 
around starchy staples are replaced by diets with more 
animal proteins. Economic development seems to be the 
main reason behind the nutrition transition where the 
traditional and largely plant-based diets give way to more 
varied diets with increased consumption of meat,  
milk, eggs, dairy, vegetables, fruits  
and processed foods2. 
The two opposing patterns of protein food choices are primarily dictated by 
economic factors and shaped by tradition, religion, culture and education. 


Text on page 4:
What are the 
regional nuances? 
The nutrient density of diets is a major concern in lower- and higher-income  
countries alike. Diets in lower income countries may lack high quality protein and 
several population groups are at risk for micronutrient inadequacies or overt clinical 
deficiencies. Higher income countries have seen micronutrient deficiencies among 
vulnerable groups, notably among those who consume only or mostly plant proteins. 
At highest risk are infants, children, pregnant women, and the elderly.  
Affordability and accessibility are the main drivers of 
protein food choices in both Africa and Asia3. Several 
countries in Asia have experienced a sharp rise in 
income and seen a rapid increase in urbanization. 
For example, China, Indonesia and Nigeria have seen 
increasing consumption of meat, poultry and dairy, 
though these animal sources are more often chosen by 
younger, more educated and city dwelling professionals. 
At the same time, traditional plant-based diets of grains 
(rice, maize) and root crops (cassava, yams, sweet 
potatoes) remain common in rural and lower income 
areas4. This further contributes to the complexity, with 
difference in protein food choices between the rural and 
urban populations, and also between the younger and 
older generations. 
 
Conversely, in wealthier countries such as Belgium,  
The Netherlands, United States and Singapore, 
affordability and access to nutritious foods are 
adequate. In these countries, the main arguments for 
the adoption of plant-forward or plant-based diets are 
personal health and environmental concerns.  
 
Although animal protein consumption in low- and 
middle-income countries is expected to persist, its 
growth rate will likely decelerate compared to decades 
ago. Meanwhile, the transition towards plant protein in 
Belgium and The Netherlands is slowing despite 
government efforts to promote it. Experts foresee a 
similar deceleration in countries experiencing rapid 
shifts towards animal protein consumption, ultimately 
leading to a convergence of the two opposing trends.
Netherlands
Belgium
Nigeria 
China
Indonesia
United States
Singapore


Text on page 5:
Belgium and The Netherlands:  
towards a ratio of 40:60  
There are proposals to achieve a 40:60 ratio with 60% 
of the protein coming from plants5,6. Initial ambitions 
have been lowered to some extent, from reversing the 
current 60:40 ratio to improving the ratio. To avoid 
nutrient deficiencies, the current advice is to reduce red 
meat consumption and maintain the current levels of 
dairy and fish intake. The recommendation is to vary 
plant protein sources for better nutrient balance and  
to consume more legumes, nuts, and seeds. A plant 
forward diet is viewed as an important step in reducing 
greenhouse gas emission from the agriculture sector,  
as well as energy and land use. 
 
United States:  
technological advances 
The current ratio of animal to plant proteins in the diet 
is about 66:34. There is a lot of interest in alternative 
proteins, derived from soy or pea concentrates and 
isolates, and in precision fermentation and lab grown 
meat. The Food and Drug Administration has not taken  
a position on regulating technological innovations in  
this area. There is also scientific debate on whether all 
plant-based diets have equivalent health benefits. 
Recent studies have started to separate “bad” (e.g., corn 
oil and ultra-processed foods) and “good” plant-based 
diets (e.g., vegetables, fruits, nuts, and seeds). 
 
Singapore:  
government support for alternative 
proteins  
The government introduced a strategy called “30 by 30” 
to produce 30% of the country’s nutritional needs 
locally and sustainably by 2030. The strategy focuses on 
diversifying food sources, growing locally and growing 
overseas. Diversifying food sources involves exploring 
alternative proteins such as plant, insect, fungi, algae, 
and cultured meat.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Local challenges identiﬁed  
by the expert panel  
 
To avoid oversimplifying a complex matter, the experts highlighted the local 
dynamics of protein food choice.
Vit.B1
2
Zn
Vit.B2
Vit.K


Text on page 6:
Indonesia:  
animal proteins to address stunting  
in young children  
It is crucial to acknowledge that Indonesia faces the 
triple burden of malnutrition: under-, overnutrition and 
micronutrient deficiency. Consequently, guidance on 
protein food choices must be carefully tailored. 
Presently, as a component of a stunting prevention 
initiative, the Indonesian government actively advocates 
for the intake of animal protein sources, particularly 
eggs and milk, among young children. Animal proteins 
offer superior quality compared to plant proteins, and 
eggs and milk are both affordable and readily available7.  
 
Nigeria:  
protein food choice driven mainly  
by economics 
Protein food choices are primarily driven by economic 
factors. Economic challenges, such as lower purchasing 
power and high inflation rates, determine what people 
can afford, with meat and fish often associated with 
higher social status. While traditionally not a dairy-
consuming country, globalization and education have 
increased dairy consumption, particularly in urban areas 
in Nigeria. Opportunities for dairy exist among children, 
young adults and health-conscious elderly individuals. 
Despite economic difficulties, these three demographic 
groups offer substantial potential owing to the sizable 
population of Nigeria. 
 
China:  
10 year gap between rural and urban,  
intergenerational diﬀerences 
There is a notable urban-rural disparity of approximately 
ten years in terms of urbanization rates between rural 
and urban populations. Furthermore, intergenerational 
differences in dietary habits are evident, particularly 
regarding the consumption of animal versus plant 
protein. While older generations in rural areas often 
adhere to traditional diets rich in plant-based protein 
sources, younger and urban populations tend to 
incorporate more animal protein into their diets, 
reflecting changing lifestyles and dietary preferences 
influenced by urbanization and economic development. 
 


Text on page 7:
Professor Adam Drewnowski:  
Based on industry sources, the market for plant-based 
meat alternatives in United States has cooled, but the market for 
milk alternatives remains strong. Nevertheless, in many cases, the 
new plant-based beverages are not viewed as alternatives to milk 
but as less sweet alternatives to soft drinks. Technically, plant-based 
products that resemble the original but are nutritionally inferior 
ought to be called “imitations”. Hence, the pressure to fortify meat 
and dairy alternatives where appropriate. A challenge will be to 
educate consumers to distinguish between healthier natural plant 
protein and new-to-the-world products of inferior nutritional value. 
What does the future hold? 
 
Professor Ma Guansheng:  
Sustainability is poised to become a 
component of future dietary guidelines, 
with a focus on reducing meat consumption 
in favor for seafood. Anticipated trends 
suggest a continued increase in dairy 
consumption, supported by the 
introduction of innovative products 
by dairy companies catering to 
various demographic groups.
Professor Aryono Hendarto:  
Despite abundant protein sources, 
Indonesians consume less animal 
protein than recommended. 
According to the FAO, Indonesia 
has one of the lowest meat and milk 
consumption rates globally. However, 
increasing urbanization and awareness 
of dairy's nutritional benefits are driving 
interest in its incorporation into daily diets. 
With a rising middle-class population and 
changing consumer preferences, there's a 
promising opportunity for increasing dairy 
consumption. As for plant-based protein, the 
market is rapidly expanding with increasing 
production of meat and seafood substitutes.
Professor Folake Samuel:  
Affordability and accessibility 
will remain central factors 
influencing food choices in 
Nigeria. Widening income 
disparities may result in 
consumer segmentation, 
with higher income 
individuals accessing 
healthier protein sources, 
while lower income groups 
may have limited protein types 
and qualities.
Associate Professor Mary Chong:  
A challenge in increasing dairy consumption 
in populations that do not traditionally 
consume dairy, is the common association  
of products like yogurt and milk with 
breakfast rather than other meals. 
Fortified milk, with high levels  
of calcium and protein, is 
available in the Singapore 
market and could serve as 
an interesting avenue to 
explore if increasing dairy  
intake proves difficult. 
Looking 
ahead to the 
next 5 to 10 years  
in their regions, the 
experts shared their 
perspectives on future 
developments and 
challenges to protein 
food choice.
Professor Wim Verbeke:  
Awareness about the importance of health and 
sustainability in food choice has increased but 
people do not consistently act as consumers in 
line with their attitude as citizen. We observe a 
countertrend with a renewed attachment or 
return to animal protein among some consumer 
groups and a slowing down recently of the pace 
of the protein transition that has been on-going 
already for 25 years in developed economies.


Text on page 8:
FrieslandCampina Institute provides healthcare professionals with information about dairy, nutrition 
and health following scientific developments. This information is meant solely for professionals and not 
for consumers, clients, or patients. Are you a healthcare professional who wants to know all about 
dairy, nutrition, and health? Contact FrieslandCampina Institute to find out more. 
 
www.frieslandcampinainstitute.com 
institute@frieslandcampina.com 
 
Follow us on social media: 
 
Disclaimer 
© FrieslandCampina 2024. Although FrieslandCampina Institute has taken the greatest possible care in 
preparing this document, the information provided and/or displayed in this document may be incomplete or 
incorrect. FrieslandCampina Institute assumes no responsibility or obligation whatsoever with respect to any 
printing, spelling, typographical or other similar errors of any kind in materials published by it. 
 
Version March 2024
References: 
1.
FAO, WHO. Sustainable healthy diets. 
FAODocuments. doi:10.4060/CA6640EN 
2.
What Lies Behind the Transition From Plant-Based to 
Animal Protein? AMA J Ethics. 2018;20(10):E987-
993. doi:10.1001/amajethics.2018.987 
3.
Drewnowski A, Mognard E, Gupta S, et al. Socio-
Cultural and Economic Drivers of Plant and Animal 
Protein Consumption in Malaysia: The SCRiPT Study. 
Nutrients. 2020;12(5):1530. doi:10.3390/nu12051530 
4.
Petrikova I, Bhattacharjee R, Fraser PD. The 
‘Nigerian Diet’ and Its Evolution: Review of the 
Existing Literature and Household Survey Data. 
Foods. 2023;12(3):443. doi:10.3390/foods12030443 
5.
Netherlands Nutrition Centre. Eating more 
sustainably. 
6.
Flanders Research Institute for Agriculture, 
Fisheries and Food. Press release. Green Deal 
Protein Shift aims for sustainable dietary patterns. 
https://ilvo.vlaanderen.be/en/news/green-deal-
protein-shift-aims-for-sustainable-dietary-patterns 
7.
Sjarif DR, Yuliarti K, Iskandar WJ. Daily consumption 
of growing-up milk is associated with less stunting 
among Indonesian toddlers. Med J Indones. 
2019;28(1):70-76. doi:10.13181/mji.v28i1.2607


